Jeff Gerling - Ansible 101 - Episode 6 - Ansible Vault and Roles (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JFweg2dUvqM&list=PL2_OBreMn7FqZkvMYt6ATmgC0KAGGJNAN&index=6)

Ansible Vault & Roles:

Ansible Vault works just like a real world vault where you take something sensitive like a password or an API key that you would have in a variable and you've put it in a vault and Ansible encrypts the vault and gives you a key
which is your password and then with that key you can unlock the vault anytime you run an ansible playbook.
There are a few technicalities to that...

You would for example have an vars/api_key.yml file where you have a var with sensitive content like an API key or other variable which refers to an important sensitive value,
you can encrypt that variable into an Ansible Vault by running: 'ansible-vault encrypt vars/api_key.yml'

api_key.yml example:

---
myapp_api_key: "asdasdfsafagmaoidjasakdnas1251221"


after runnign the 'ansible-vault encrypt' command line, the cmd is gonna ask you for a password, and this password it's gonna be the key to that file basically, so after running that and setting the password for the ansible vault,
if you go to the api_key.yml file you are going to see that the file is encrypted.

Now, if i run the playbook normally and in the playbook I were already using the var within api_key.yml, it won't work, now we have to run in with a different command...
we should run it using de command line 'ansible-playbook main.yml --ask-vault-pass' which is gonna ask we about that ansible vault password.

But if your want to run it automatically, for example in a pipeline or using other methodology which automates the execution of the command line and you don't want to hardcode the ansible vault password,
you should also supply a password file, in which case you can run the playbook using the following command line: 'ansible-playbook main.yml --vault-password-file <filePathOfThePassword'sFile>'.
This password file could be a .txt file like 'api-key-pass.txt' in which case you would run 'ansible-playbook main.yml --vault-password-file ~/ansible/api-key-pass.txt'.
You can also decrypt var files for example using the following command line: 'ansible-vault decrypt vars/api_key.yml' (not recommended).
You can also edit the var file without decrypting the file by using: 'ansible-vault edit vars/api_key.yml'.
You can change the ansible vault password of the file using: 'ansible-vault rekey vars/api_key.yml'


Ansible var files:

You can have variables in one unqiue .yml file and refer to it on the main.yml playbook by using 'vars_files', and you can refer more than one (for example, you can have one var file for non sensitive variables (not encrypted)
and other one encrtypted var file (with ansible vault) within sensitive variables) as in the following example:

---
- hosts: localhost
  connection: local
  gather_facts: no

  vars_files:
    - vars/api_key.yml

  tasks:
    ...


More task features --> conditionals and tags:
For example you can use the 'changed_when' or 'failed_when', especially when you are using a shell module or a command module, you might want to have custom conditions for when its changed or nor or when its failed or not,
based on the output of a response (you can capture a response on a temp variable using 'register' on that task).

Also if you run task that have errors but you want to run it anyways, you can set 'ignore_errors: true' on that task.


Includes and imports:

We can, for example, have a main.yml playbook, in which we import tasks for other files on different directories, and you can slo pass variables to that imported tasks from the main.yml playbook.
Example:

---
- name: Install Apache.
  hosts: all
  become: true

  handlers:
    - import_tasks: handlers/apache.yml

  pre_tasks:
    - name: Load variable files.
      include_vars: "{{ item }}"
      with_first_found:
        - "vars/apache_{{ ansible_os_family }}.yml"
        - "vars/apache_default.yml"

  tasks:
    - import_tasks: tasks/apache.yml
      # Example of passing variables to an imported task
      vars:
        apache_package: apache3


Caution abour dynamic tasks:

For example:
(the previous main.yml)
---
...
  tasks:
    - import_tasks: tasks/apache.yml
      
    - name: Check for existing lof files in dynamic log_file_paths variable.
      find:
        paths: "{{ item }}"
        patterns: '*.log'
      register: found_log_file_paths
      with_items: "{{ log_file_paths }}"

The 'Check for existing...' task have a variable 'log_file_paths' that is dynamically defined, instead of doing that we would rather use the 'include_tasks' for including that task there, for example:

---
...
  tasks:
    - import_tasks: tasks/apache.yml
    - include_tasks: tasks/log.yml

Include have dynamically defined information going into tasks or dynamically changing tasks.
It's hard to know exactly when to use an include instead of using an import, but for example,
if in a playbook you use all imports, and you don't know why it's not working, you should examine for which task you whould rather use include instead of import (several times just changing that keyword you'll have a better result).

Another detail is that playbooks can also be included, just like tasks:

---
...
  tasks:
    - import_tasks: tasks/apache.yml
    - include_tasks: tasks/log.yml

- import_playbook: app.yml





----------------------------------


Jeff Gerling - Ansible 101 - Episode 7 - Molecule Testing and Linting and Ansible Galaxy (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FaXVZ60o8L8&list=PL2_OBreMn7FqZkvMYt6ATmgC0KAGGJNAN&index=7)
      

When we want to use roles for collections of ansible galaxy we can specify that roles of that collections on a 'requirements.yml' file, and then when we run 'ansible-galaxy install -r requirements.yml', that command line will install that
roles on our project.

Example of requirements.yml:

---
roles:
  - name: elliotweiser.osx-command-line-tools
  - name: geerlingguy.homebrew


Unit integration and functional testing in Ansible itself:
- The first level of testing is checking the .yml syntax.
- The second level: Is this valid Ansible?
- The third level: Does this Ansible playbook run in a fresh environment?
- The fourth level: Does this Ansible playbook run idempotently and will run against production multiple times without breaking things?
- The fifth level: have a parallel environment that's a replica of the production environment and rebuild that environment from scratch everytime you make a change that make sure everytihing works correctly.

Testing steps:
- yamllint
- ansible-playbook --syntax-check: make sure that basic components of syntax work with ansible and ansible can compile the playbook (doesn't mean it's gonna run).
- ansible-lint: tests for the yaml that's in your playbook to make sure it's compatible with best practices.
- molecule test (integration): integration test that runs your playbook against a fresh environment.
- ansible-playbook --check (against production environment): for structure to see the changes you would do.
- Parallel infrastructure: deploy a infrasrtructure replica, run the playbook againts it, see what it happens and then destroy that parallel infrastructure. (rare)

Best practices for testing the functionality on the playbook itself:
Debug module: print things to the screen, it also has a setting for verbosity .
Fail and assert modules: 

To use yamllint we have to install with the following command line:

'pip3 install yamllint'

then you can run yamllint on a specific directory and it will analyze the yaml files with the following command line:

'yamllint .'

using yamllint, yamllint don't recognize 'yes', 'no', '0' or '1' as boolean values, only recognizes 'true' or 'false'. if you want to use more values for booleans, you can set that in a file called '.yamllint' which you would have exactly 
within the same directory in which you will run yamllint.

Example:
---
extends: default

rules:
  truthy:
    allowed-values:
      - 'true'
      - 'false'
      - 'yes'
      - 'no'


Then, in the following testing phase in which we would use the syntax check approach, we run it using the command line 'ansible-playbook playbook.yml --syntax-check'.
when checking the 'include_tasks' part of the playbook, the syntax check wont check if that file exists, however, it will check the existence of the imported tasks on the 'import_tasks' part of the playbook.

The following test phase is ansible-lint, which we can use running ir with the following command line: 'ansible-lint playbook.yml', ansible-lint would perform a analysys in depth of best ansible practices and would warn us
about some things in our playbooks, for example, if we don't name a task or we use a specific functionality that we can achieve with a minor complex way, ansible-lint will recommend to change something.


Next step: Molecule
It's basically a way to use Ansible to set up a test environment, to run an Ansible playbook, to do tests on the Ansible environment and then tear it down (all using Ansible).
You install molecule with the command line 'pip3 install molecule' (in the same way you install ansible-lint or yamllint).

- Create a new role with molecule: molecule init role myrole
- Then test it: molecule test
- And test it but leave the container running for debugging: molecule converge
(Set a 'breakpoint' using 'fail:' in the tasks for debugging).
 
When you create a role running the molecule role creation command line, it creates the same structure than creating a role with ansible, but also creates a molecule directory with a default configuration for the molecule testing, in which
directory are the following files that you can personalize:
- molecule.yml: specifies dependencies (default value is galaxy), a driver (default value is docker), platforms (specification of docker image (default value is a centos image), and some docker default configuration),
provisioner (default value is ansible) and verifier (default value is ansible).
- converge.yml: is a simple playbook that runs the role that you just created.
- verify.yml: here you specify your tests inside of that molecule enviroment.

The use of the 'fail:' for debugging when using molecule its based in that, if you run molecule test, and in some part of your playbook you put a 'fail:', the playbook will be executed but it will stop in the 'fail:' line, because of the fail,
so, there you can debug something by changing the 'fail:' from line to line, using it like a breakpoint.

with the command line 'molecule login' you can enter the instance in which you are running the molecule environment, so there you can dive into the instance validating your ansible configuration.

finally, we can exit the instance and destroy it with 'molecule destroy'.

Actualized molecule:
It don't creates a role, you can create a role using ansible-galaxy and then, within the role directory, run 'molecule init scenario' which creates the default molecule testing scenario.


(Here are documentation about using molecule to test ansible into an Azure environment: 'https://jloudon.com/cloud/Ansible-on-Azure-Part-3/').
--------------------------------

Jeff Gerling - Ansible 101 - Episode 8 - Playbook Testing with Molecule and GitHub Actions CI (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CYghlf-6Opc&list=PL2_OBreMn7FqZkvMYt6ATmgC0KAGGJNAN&index=8)

On the docker default configuration of the default molecule scenario, in the molecule.yml file there are a default docker image for the scenario, there we can use a Dockerfile setting the 'pre_build_image' to false, or we can change
the docker image value with other image which we want to use to set te molecule ansible testing scenario... we can use images from "https://ansible.jeffgeerling.com/#container-images-testing".

molecule also injects a default command in the virtual machine when initializing the molecule environment, that can have conflicts with some ansible configuration, to disable that commando, add 'command: ""' on the docker config on molecule.yml.

Molecule verifiers:
in verify.yml you can define tasks to test if the ansible configuration that you done is well done.
(you can also specify this tasks as the final ttasks in the main playbook and it will have the same testing effect).

you can run the tests by using the following command line: 'molecule verify'

Also you can complement molecule testing with ansible-lint and yamllint by specifying in the molecule.yml, just under the definition of the driver:

lint: |
  set -e
  yamllint.
  ansible-lint

so the if you run the command line 'molecule lint' it will execute both lint analizers.

We can also automate molecule tests for each push to a github repository with github actions.
(Example in episode-8 directory) (this automation example will work automatically with each push if the 'episode-8' directory was the principal directory of the github repository).

This molecule explanation is from 2020, so its pretty different, if you are reading this and you see the example you are going to see that a bunch of things are different as are described here, but i did this to understand
the core functionalities, which are pretty the same. For updated information about molecule see 'https://docs.ansible.com/projects/molecule/'.


